
--- PAGE 1 ---
Robust Collaborative LLM Inference in
UA V-enabled Wireless Networks
Abstract—
I. I NTRODUCTION
Recently, edge artiﬁcial intelligence (AI), where intelligence
is pushed from the network core to the edge via running
AI algorithms over edge devices, is seen as a promising key
enabler to meet the great vision of ubiquitous intelligence [1].
FL has demonstrated its empirical success with theoretical
convergence guarantees [2]. Many literature have studied how
to improve the learning performance [3]–[9].
Our proposed optimization problem yields two main techni-
cal challenges. First, edge association has been generally NP-
hard. Then combining the resource allocation forms a complex
mixed integer nonlinear programming (MINLP) problem with
coupled optimization variables. Second, although the objective
function could be equal to a set function via some transfor-
mation, it is essentially neither submodular nor supermodular,
which makes the problem more challenging.
Our main contributions are summarized as follows:
• Firstly, XXX
• Secondly,XXX.
• Thirdly, XXX
II. R ELATED WORKS
XXXXXXXXXXXXXX
III. M ODEL AND PROBLEM FORMULATION
In this work, we highlights the deployments of a splitting
LLM across UA V swarms. Speciﬁcally, we consider a general
collaborative edge networks, composed of a total of N UA VS
equipped with embedded intelligent computing devices. For
the requirements of sensing tasks, these UA Vs ﬂy with a
constant speed according to the predetermined trajectory, to
perform monitoring missions supported by LLMs. Since LLMs
usually have a layered architecture consisting of an embedding
layer, multiple decoder layer, and an output layer, without
loss of generality, we assume the LLM is with L layers. oi
represents the size of activations of layer l, 0≤ l≤ L. Let
Meml be the size of the storage space occupied by a layer
l ∈ L and cl is the computation requirement. Due to the
heterogeneous resource limitation in UA Vs, we consider the
maximum storage capacity Mem max
n , computation capacity
Fn, energy threshold En for each UA V n ∈ {1, 2,...,N}.
Based on the model partition technique, the LLM can be
divided into multiple submodels and deployed on the UA Vs
for collaborative inference.
x
y
z
Model upload
Model download
Local model
Local dataset
UA Vs as 
parameter servers
Coverage range
Fig. 1: An illustration of service provisioning in MEC.
A. Latency and Energy Cost Models
To quantify the collaborative inference overhead, we for-
mulate the latency and energy cost models. We introduce the
binary decision variable xl,n to denote the LLM deployment
strategy. xl,n = 1 indicates layer l is deployed on UA V n,
otherwise, xl,n = 0. There are two kinds of latency in UA V-
enabled collaborative task processing, computation latency
and communication latency. Let tcmp
l,n denote the computation
latency of executing inference task for layerl on UA Vn. Then
we have tcmp
l,n = cl
fn
. The corresponding energy consumption
is ecmp
l,n = kof 2
ncl, where k0 represents the energy efﬁciency
parameter. On this basis, for each UA V n, the total computa-
tion latency is tcmp
n =
L∑
l=1
tcmp
l,n xl,n, and the total computation
energy consumption is ecmp
n =
L∑
l=1
ecmp
l,n xl,n.
If layer l and layer l + 1 are deployed on different UA Vs,
e.g., UA Vn andn′, we usetcom
l,n,n′ to denote the communication
latency of transmitting the activation parameters of layer l
from UA Vn to n′. The achievable uplink data rate between
UA Vn and UA Vn′ is
rn,n′ =Bn log(1 + pnhn,n′
N0
), (1)
where Bn is spectrum bandwidth of each communication
channel, pn is the transmission power of UE n and hn,n′ is
channel gain between UA Vn andn′. Since the data size of ac-
tivations of layer l isol, we have tcom
l,n,n′ =ol/rn,n′, if n̸=n′;
otherwise tcom
l,n,n′ = 0. The corresponding energy consumption
isecom
l,n,n′ =pntcom
l,n,n′ = pnol
rn,n′ , ifn̸=n′; otherwiseecom
l,n,n′ = 0.
On this basis, for each UA Vn, the total communication latency
is tcom
n =
L−1∑
l=1
N∑
n′=1
tcom
l,n,n′xl,nxl+1,n′. The total computation


--- PAGE 2 ---
energy consumption is ecom
n =
L−1∑
l=1
N∑
n′=1
ecom
l,n,n′xl,nxl+1,n′.
The UA Vs hover at ﬁxed positions to simultaneously collect
data from their coverage areas and perform inference tasks for
surveillance objectives. The hovering energy consumption of
UA V noden is modeled as
ehov
n =Phov
n Thov (2)
where Phov
n denotes the hovering power of UA V n and Thov
represents the hovering duration. We have
Thov =
N∑
n=1
(tcmp
n +tcom
n ). (3)
We assume all UA V devices maintain a ﬁxed hovering duration
Thov above the monitoring area during task execution. This
uniﬁed hovering time constraint ensures temporal synchro-
nization across the swarm while satisfying mission continuity
requirements.
B. Packet Drop Probability
In this work, we use a cyclic redundancy check (CRC)-
based error detection mechanism [ ?] to identify potential data
corruption in the local models received at the edge server.
The unreliability of UA V uplink transmission is characterized
through the metric of packet drop probability. Concurrently,
we adopt the assumption that downlink transmission maintains
reliability, ensuring the successful reception of the global
model transmitted from the edge server to the UA V . This
assumption is justiﬁed by the fact that edge servers are typ-
ically equipped with signiﬁcantly higher transmission power
capabilities compared to UA Vs, thereby guaranteeing robust
downlink communication.
Let γ0 denotes the Signal-to-Noise Ratio (SNR) threshold
for successful data decoding. The successful transmission
indicator of UA V n is In = I (SNRn≥γ0), where I(˙)
is indicator function, SNRn,n′ =
pnhn,n′
N0
. The successful
transmission indicator In = 1 means UA V n successfully
transferred the model to the edge server, or 0 otherwise. The
packet drop probability (PDP) of UA V n through channel is
given by
PDPn = Pr (SNRn <γ 0) = Pr
(pnhn,n′
N0
<γ 0
)
= Pr
(
ξn < γ0N0
pnhn,n′
)
= 1−e
− γ0N0
pnhn,n′ (4)
C. Problem F ormulation
The performance of the LLMs is commonly quantiﬁed using
the perplexity (PPL) metric, a standard means in NLP to eval-
uate how well a probability model predicts a sample. Given
an LLM and a sequence of N tokens, (i.e., w1,w 2,...,w M ),
the PPL is deﬁned as
PPL = exp(− 1
M
M∑
k=1
logPLLM (w1,w 2,...,w k−1)),
where PLLM (w1,w 2,...,w k−1) denotes the LLM’s pred-
cition probability form the previsous k− 1 tokens. A lower
PPL signiﬁes superior model performance, demonstrating the
models proﬁciency in accurately predicting the subsequent
word in a sequence. Hence, in this context, PPL can serve as
a uniﬁed metric to assess the impact of channel impairments
on the LLMs ability.
Based on the aforementioned models, we deﬁne the joint
optimization problem of submodel deployment and bandwidth
allocation as follows:
(P1) : Min
X,B
Q(X, B) = αPPL +βT total
=α· exp
(
− 1
K
K∑
k=1
logPLLM (ωk|ω1,ω 2,...,ω k−1)
)
+β·
L∑
l=1
N∑
N =1
xl,n·tcmp
l,n +
L−1∑
l=1
N∑
n=1
N∑
n′=1
xl,n·xl+1,n′·tcom
l,n,n′
)
s.t. C1 :
L∑
l=1
Meml·xl,n≤Mem max
n ,∀n∈N ,
C2 :Ecmp
n +Ecom
n +Ehov
n ≤Emax
n ,∀n∈N ,
C3 :
N∑
n=1
Bn≤Bmax.
The above optimization problem involves two variables as
X ={xl,n}n∈N,l∈L, B ={Bn}n,n′∈N . Constraint (C1) en-
sures that the total occupied memory space of deployed layers
cannot exceed the maximum storage capacity. Constraint (C2)
limits computation energy consumption, transmission energy
consumption, and hovering energy consumption during col-
laborative inference in UA V swarm. Constraint (C3) indicates
the allocated bandwidth should not exceed the communication
resource capacity.
Complexity Analysis: Unfortunately, it is non-trivial to
directly solve the problem P1 due to several challenges. (1)
Problem (P1) is a mixed integer programming nonconvex
problem, which is hard to solve. It would takes a long
time to ﬁnding the optimal submodel deployment decision
X due to the exponentially large search space (eg., N∗ 2L).
Besides, the decision variables X and B are coupled with each
other, which makes it more difﬁcult. (2) When considering
the performance-overhead trade-off, the relationship between
the inference performance and decision variables is implicit,
since there is no speciﬁc mathematical analytical formula in
the objective function. (3) In practical scenarios, the mobile
nature of UA Vs often leads to rapidly changing channel state
and great variability in noise levels among UA V swarm.
This dynamic environment necessitates continuous adaptation
of the submodel deployment strategy to maintain inference
performance under varying wireless channel conditions.
IV. S OLUTION
A. Problem Transformation
Considering the variability of network conditions, we as-
sume only the wireless channel gains h ={hn,n′},n,n′∈N


--- PAGE 3 ---
are time-varying in the considered period while other system
parameters in Eqs 1-4 are ﬁxed. For each time frame with
channel realization h, it falls into the scope of the complex
optimization problem in P1, which involves two coupled
decision variables. However, once the binary variables X is
given, problem P1 can be reduced to a resource allocation
subproblem as follows.
(P2) : Min
B
Q(B) = αPPL +βT total
s.t. C2 :Ecmp
n +Ecom
n +Ehov
n ≤Emax
n ,∀n∈N ,
C3 :
N∑
n=1
Bn≤Bmax.
Naturally,PPL is a constant value with the ﬁxed submodel
deployment strategy. Problem P2 is a convex problem only
regarding to B, where the optimal bandwidth allocation can
be efﬁciently solved, e.g., using the LP solver in O(N )
complexity.
The major difﬁculty of soling problem P1 lies in the
submodel deployment variable X. Traditional optimization
algorithms require iteratively adjusting model splitting and
deployment decisions towards the optimum, which is funda-
mentally infeasible for real-time system optimization under
dynamically changing channel.
Considering the variability of network conditions and the
real-time system optimization in distributed UA V swarm, we
reformulate this optimization problem as a sequential decision-
making task. To tackle this complex issue, we propose a novel
deep reinforcement learning-based online submodel deploy-
ment (DROS) algorithm which is adaptive to the evolving
environment.
B. The Markov Decision Process
The submodel deployment can be formalized as a Markov
Decision Process (MDP), thus we ﬁrstly deﬁne the three
critical factors, namely state space, action space and reward
function as follows.
(1) State Space.
The state space S encompasses current wireless channel
gains h(t), submodel deployment X(t), namely, s(t) =
{h(t), X(t)}∈S . Through s(t), we can solve problem P2
and obtain the transmission latency, computation latency, as
well as the required energy consumption and memory for each
inference task at this state.
(2) Action Space.
The action space A is designed to accommodate a range
of possible adjustment of submodel deployment by decid-
ing which layer of the LLM is deployed on which UA V .
The submodel deployment is deﬁned as a vector of binary
variable xl,n(t), which is presented by: a(t) = X(t) =
{xl,n(t)}n∈N,l∈L. This generalized action space provides the
ﬂexibility to optimize the model splitting strategy dynamically
in response to varying channel environments.
(3) Reward Function.
We aim to minimize the total inference latency and improve
the inference accuracy in the noise environment. Thus, func-
tion Q is set as the reward of the our system and we have
Rt =−Q(X(t), B(t)).
C. DROS Algorithm
For dynamically adjusting the splitting of LLMs within
UA V networks, we aim to learn an submodel deployment
policy φ : h → X∗ which quickly generates an optimal
submodel deployment action X∗∈{ 0, 1}N×L of problem P1
once the channel realization h is revealed at the beginning of
each time frame. We employ the DROS algorithm to iteratively
learn such policy φ from the experience by autonomous
training sampling.
Our DROS algorithm includes two alterative stages: deploy-
ment action generation and deployment policy update. The
generation of the deployment action relies on the use of a
DNN, which is parameterized by θ, namely, the weights that
connect the hidden neurons. In the t-th time frame, the DNN
takes the channel gain h(t) as the input, and outputs a relaxed
deployment action ˆX (each entry is relaxed to continuous
between 0 and 1) based on its current deployment policy
ˆX(t). The relaxed action is then quantized into K binary
deployment actions, among which one best action X∗(t) is
selected based on the achievable reward, related to function
Q in P1. The corresponding {X∗(t), B∗(t)} is output as the
solution for h(t), which guarantees that all constraints listed
in (C1)-(C3) are satisﬁed. The network takes the deployment
action X∗(t), receives a reward Q(X∗(t), B∗(t)), and adds
the newly obtained state-action pair (h(t), X∗(t)) to the replay
memory.
Subsequently, in the policy update stage of the t-th time
frame, a batch of training samples are drawn from the memory
to train the DNN, which accordingly updates its parameter
fromθ(t) toθ(t + 1) (and equivalently the deployment policy
φθ(t+1)). The new deployment policy φθ(t+1)) is used in the
next time frame to generate deployment decision X∗(t + 1)
according to the new channel h(t+1) observed. Such iterations
repeat thereafter as new channel realizations are observed,
and the policy φθ(t)) of the DNN is gradually improved. The
descriptions of the two stages are detailed as follows.
Deployment Action Generation:
Suppose that we observe the channel gain realization h(t) in
thet-th time frame, where t = 1, 2,... . The DNN ﬁrst outputs
a relaxed computation ofﬂoading action ˆX(t). Thus, we have
ˆX(t) = fθ(t)(h(t)), (5)
where ˆxl,n(t)∈ [0, 1].
Then, we quantize ˆX(t) to obtain K binary deployment
actions, where K is a design parameter. A larger K results in
better solution quality and higher computational complexity,
and vice versa. The quantization function, gK , is deﬁned as
gK : ˆX(t)→{ X(k)|X(k)∈{ 0, 1}N×L,k = 1, 2,...,K},
(6)


--- PAGE 4 ---
Recall that each candidate action X(k) can achieve
Q∗(h(t), X(k)) reward by solving problem P2. Therefore, the
best deployment action X(t)∗ at the t-th time frame is chosen
as
X(t)∗ = arg max
X(i)∈X(k)
Q∗(h(t), X(i)). (7)
Note that the K-times evaluation of Q∗(h(t), X(k)) can
be processed in parallel to speed up the computation of Eq. 7.
Then, the network outputs the deployment action X(t) along
with its corresponding optimal resource allocation B(t).
Deployment Policy Update:
The ofﬂoading solution obtained in Eq. 7 will be used to
update the deployment policy of the DNN. Speciﬁcally, we
maintain an initially empty memory of limited capacity. At
the t-th time frame, a new training data sample (h(t), X(t))
is added to the memory. When the memory is full, the newly
generated data sample replaces the oldest one.
We use the experience replay technique [15], [30] to train
the DNN using the stored data samples.
Overall, the DNN iteratively learns from the best stateaction
pairs (h(t), X(t))’s and generates better ofﬂoading decisions
output as the time progresses. Meanwhile, with the ﬁnite
memory space constraint, the DNN only learns from the most
recent data samples generated by the most recent (and more
reﬁned) ofﬂoading policies. This closed-loop reinforcement
learning mechanism constantly improves its ofﬂoading policy
until convergence. We provide the pseudocode of the DROO
algorithm in Algorithm 1.
Algorithm 1: An online DROS algorithm to solve the
submodel deployment decision problem.
Input: Wireless channel gain h(t) at each time frame t, the
number of quantized actions K.
Output: Deployment action X(t)∗, and the corresponding
optimal resource allocation B(t)∗ for each time frame
t.
1 Initialize the DNN with random parameters θ1 and empty
memory.
2 Set iteration number M and the training interval δ.
3 fort = 1, 2,...,M do
4 Generate a relaxed ofﬂoading action ˆX(t) = fθ(t)(h(t)).
5 Quantize ˆX(t) intoK binary actions {X(k)} =gK ( ˆX(t)).
6 Compute Q∗(h(t), X(k)) for all {X(k)} by solving (P2).
7 Select the best action
X(t)∗ = arg max
X(i)∈X(k)
Q∗(h(t), X(i)).
8 Update the memory by adding (h(t), X(t)).
9 if t mod δ = 0 then
10 Uniformly sample a batch of data set
{(h(τ ), X(τ ))|τ ∈ T (t)} from the memory.
11 Train the DNN with {(h(τ ), X(τ ))|τ ∈ T (t)} and
update θ(t) using the Adam algorithm.
12 end
13 end
Adaptive Setting of K:
D. The Reward Surrogate Model for Faster RL
The integration of DROS into our LLM split optimization
scenario signiﬁcantly enhances the efﬁciency and effectiveness
of our RL approach. Nevertheless, the slow reasoning capa-
bility of LLM makes the learning process sluggish. Therefore,
inspired by the classical model-based reinforce learning, which
uses a predictive model to simulate the environment, we adopt
a surrogate model to approximate the reward function, thereby
boosting the learning efﬁciency.
V. E VALUATION
A. Evaluation in Energy Saving Performance
Evaluation Setup. We assume all the UEs and UA Vs are
distributed in the 1000 m×1000 m area. If no otherwise stated,
the number of UEs is 100. Referring to the setting in [10],
the effective computation capacity fn of each UE is within
[1, 5] GHz. The data transmission power is set as pn = 1 W.
The maximum bandwidth of each edge server is the same as
Bmax
m = 2 MHz [11]. We set the channel gain at the reference
distance 1m is h0 =−10 dB and the noise power N0 =−90
dBm [12]. The FL task can be the image classiﬁcation on a
dataset MNIST [?]. The parameters setting of FL task is based
on the work in [13]. We suppose the data size of each UE Dn
uniformly distributed in [1000, 1500] samples and the number
of CPU cycles required per sample is in 3×105 cycles/sample.
The uploaded model size is assumed to a constant as sn = 0.5
MB. For UA Vs, the related parameters are set as follows:
the ﬁxed altitude H = 100 m, maximum coverage range
Rmax = 100 m. The hovering time is 5 minutes, the working
power of each UA V is set as pm = 1 W and the overall
energy consumption for edge model aggregation is 100 J. The
parameters setting of FL task is based on the work in [13]. We
assume that the parameter set as v = 10,δ = 10, respectively.
Finally, unless stated otherwise, the global accuracy ε are set
to be 10−1.
Baseline. We compare the our proposed algorithm XXX
with the following three benchmark algorithms.
Random: the client selection and the trajectory decisions are
randomly made. UEs are selected randomly, just like the Fe-
dAvg algorithm. All of decisions are made under constraints.
? Delay central algorithm: without considering energy con-
sumption constraints, all decisions are made only to minimize
the service delay.
? Myopic algorithm: myopic algorithm imposes a stricter
constraint to energy consumption during every time slot. The
long-term energy constraint can be always satisﬁed without
establishing deﬁcit energy queue. All decisions are made to
meet the stricter constraint and minimize service delay.
Based on the the above settings, we run 10 times of different
algorithms to average the results.
Evaluation Results. In this section, we demonstrate the
convergence behavior of the alternating optimization-based
algorithm and study the inﬂuence of number of UEs, the
coverage range, the communication bandwidth, the local data
size and the maximum training latency constraint on the
overall energy consumption.


--- PAGE 5 ---
1) Convergence: Fig. ?? demonstrates the convergence
behavior of Algorithm 4, which is devised to obtain the
energy consumption within an edge server. We can observe
that compared with the initial scheme, the energy consumption
is optimized by 35.01%, 36.48%, and 33.97% under different
data volumes as similar as possible. Our proposed iteration
optimization algorithm can greatly reduce the Eedge
m and
converge fast within ﬁnite iterations.
VI. C ONCLUSION
REFERENCES
[1] W. Saad, M. Bennis, and M. Chen, “A vision of 6g wireless systems:
Applications, trends, technologies, and open research problems,” IEEE
Network, vol. 34, no. 3, pp. 134–142, 2020.
[2] T. Li, A. K. Sahu, M. Zaheer, M. Sanjabi, A. Talwalkar, and V . Smith,
“Federated optimization in heterogeneous networks,” Proc. MLSys ,
2020.
[3] L. Liu, J. Zhang, S. Song, and K. B. Letaief, “Client-edge-cloud
hierarchical federated learning,” in Proc. IEEE ICC , 2020, pp. 1–6.
[4] Z. Wang, H. Xu, J. Liu, H. Huang, C. Qiao, and Y . Zhao, “Resource-
efﬁcient federated learning with hierarchical aggregation in edge com-
puting,” in Proc. IEEE INFOCOM , 2021, pp. 1–10.
[5] X. Ouyang, Z. Xie, J. Zhou, J. Huang, and G. Xing, “Clusterﬂ: a
similarity-aware federated learning system for human activity recogni-
tion,” in Proceedings of the 19th AICMAS , 2021, pp. 54–66.
[6] C. T. Dinh, N. H. Tran, M. N. Nguyen, C. S. Hong, W. Bao, A. Y .
Zomaya, and V . Gramoli, “Federated learning over wireless networks:
Convergence analysis and resource allocation,” IEEE/ACM Transactions
on Networking , vol. PP, no. 99, pp. 1–12, 2020.
[7] L. Yang, Y . Lu, J. Cao, J. Huang, and M. Zhang, “E-tree learning:
A novel decentralized model learning framework for edge ai,” IEEE
Internet of Things Journal , vol. 8, no. 14, pp. 11 290–11 304, 2021.
[8] L. Yang, Y . Gan, J. Cao, and Z. Wang, “Optimizing aggregation frequen-
cy for hierarchical model training in heterogeneous edge computing,”
IEEE Transactions on Mobile Computing , 2022.
[9] X. Zhou, W. Liang, J. She, Z. Yan, I. Kevin, and K. Wang, “Two-
layer federated learning with heterogeneous model aggregation for
6g supported internet of vehicles,” IEEE Transactions on V ehicular
Technology, vol. 70, no. 6, pp. 5308–5317, 2021.
[10] S. Luo, X. Chen, Q. Wu, Z. Zhou, and S. Yu, “Hfel: Joint edge asso-
ciation and resource allocation for cost-efﬁcient hierarchical federated
edge learning,” IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communications, vol. 19,
no. 10, pp. 6535–6548, 2020.
[11] Y . Zhou, C. Pan, P. L. Yeoh, K. Wang, M. Elkashlan, B. Vucetic, and
Y . Li, “Secure communications for uav-enabled mobile edge computing
systems,” IEEE Transactions on Communications , vol. 68, no. 1, pp.
376–388, 2019.
[12] F. Zhou, Y . Wu, H. Sun, and Z. Chu, “Uav-enabled mobile edge
computing: Ofﬂoading optimization and trajectory design,” inIEEE ICC,
2018, pp. 1–6.
[13] Z. Yang, M. Chen, W. Saad, C. S. Hong, and M. Shikh-Bahaei, “Energy
efﬁcient federated learning over wireless communication networks,”
IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communications , vol. 20, no. 3, pp.
1935–1949, 2020.
